Have you ever considered who is the greatest example of humility?
If your answer is Jehovah, you're correct. Why?
Because every living intelligent creation is inferior to him,
yet he chose to and continues to include others in his activities.
Humility can be described as loatheness of mind and being free from pride and arrogance.
A humble person finds happiness in including others in his life and endeavors.
Because of its many benefits, our theme for discussion this month is humility,
a quality that will enrich our life eternally.
Jehovah's great measure of humility became apparent when he collaborated with his only begotten son
and included him as his master worker in creation.
Later, as angels were created, these mighty spirit creatures imitated the humility already being shown by Jehovah.
These faithful angels were free from pride and arrogance.
This resulted in everyone in heaven enjoying peace for eons of time.
Humility in heaven was like oil to an engine. It keeps things running smoothly.
Satan was the first one to succumb to the temptation of pride and arrogance,
rejecting the godlike quality of humility.
When he did so, rebellion and turmoil soon followed.
But it's important for us to note that the need for humility didn't arise because of sin, rebellion and imperfection.
Humility existed before these ugly traits.
It's also vital for us to understand that while Jehovah is inferior to no one, that's not the case with us.
Jehovah knows that the quality of humility will help us in our imperfect condition.
For example, it will help us to imitate him, to faithfully serve him, and to survive the end of the system of things.
Yes, Jehovah knows that humility will enrich our lives today and eternally.
We can see how important this endearing quality is to Jehovah when we read Psalm 45 verses 3 and 4.
Jehovah gave these prophetic instructions to his kingly son before the great battle in heaven.
Strap your sword on your side, O mighty one, in your dignity and your splendor.
And in your splendor, go on to victory, ride in the cause of truth and humility and righteousness.
These verses describe Jesus Christ as a king, riding in battle to defend truth, humility and righteousness.
The greatest truth, he defends, is the sanctification of Jehovah's great name.
In connection with righteousness, he supports Jehovah's standards of right and wrong.
And in the case of humility, he restores it to its rightful place among all intelligent creation.
Jesus has already reaffirmed these timeless standards in heaven.
Soon, he'll do the same for the earth, with the commission to save only those who are humble and obedient.
Our developing and displaying humility then, is essential to our survival.
If you want to know if you're truly humble at heart, ask yourself, how do others view me?
If you serve as a congregation elder, do your fellow elders feel comfortable giving you counsel?
When was the last time they did so? How did you react?
If you're serving as a pioneer, do you endeavor to learn from those with less experience?
Do our loved ones and our family feel that we really consider their opinion on matters?
Why are questions like these important?
Because a truly humble person will make a realistic assessment of himself with such questions.
Why is that? Because humility is directly related to honesty.
True humility enables us to see ourselves as we really are, and to honestly admit all of our weaknesses and failures.
In contrast, pride and arrogance are directly related to deception, and arrogant person covers up his weaknesses and failures.
And that can only last so long because, eventually, pride leads to a crash as Proverbs 16 verse 18 warns us.
Let's consider five ways that humility enriches our life.
First, the Bible clearly teaches that humble people receive God's help.
One example is David.
He became a powerful king in Israel, yet notice who he attributed his greatness to at Psalm 18 verse 35.
You give me your shield of salvation, your right hand supports me, and your humility makes me great.
Because Jehovah is humble, he lured himself to assist David, enabling this humble man to become a mighty king.
Down to our day, Jehovah delights to come to the aid of his humble servants.
Have you not felt him stoop down as it were to help you?
A second benefit is that having a humble disposition will protect us, just as a heavy coat can protect us from harsh elements.
It also makes our personality more attractive to Jehovah and to others.
Notice the word picture Peter used at first Peter 5 verse 5b.
But all of you clothe yourselves with humility toward one another because God opposes the haughty ones, but he gives undeserved kindness to the humble ones.
Clothing both protects and dignifies.
If we're missing an item of clothing or our clothing is frayed, others can surely see it.
Likewise, others can usually see if we're not fully clothed with humility.
In contrast, the more humility we display, the more attractive we are to Jehovah and to others.
Like a favorite garment, humility should be our go-to quality that's perfect for any occasion.
A third benefit of humility is that it fosters teamwork.
When co-workers apply Philippians chapter 2 verse 3, they're able to enjoy productive collaboration.
The verse says, do nothing out of contentiousness or out of ecotism, but with humility consider others superior to you.
When we appreciate that everyone is superior to us in some way, we'll be more inclined to listen to their suggestions.
Humility promotes cooperation, not competition.
Humble people see others as resources and contributors, not rivals.
Consider a single musician.
By himself he can generally only produce the sound from one instrument.
However, as a member of an orchestra, the entire music performance is enriched.
A humble musician finds contentment in collaboration, even if that places him in the background.
He doesn't aspire to receive all the attention of a solo performance or to place all out, he drowns out his fellow performers.
One translation renders humility at Philippians 2 verse 3 to be self-effacing.
This means to make ourselves inconspicuous, working in the background and avoiding the limelight.
That's like a photographer who takes portraits of others instead of himself.
And as he focuses on others, the photographer endeavors to capture their features in the best light so that they look their best.
The same principle applies to our sacred service.
In all aspects of our worship, let's remember that we're part of Jehovah's team.
By all of us humbly cooperating together, we'll be useful to Jehovah in accomplishing his will.
Our humility will put others in a favorable light with God and with others.
A fourth benefit of humility is that a humble person genuinely enjoys seeing others make advancement or receive privileges.
John the Baptist is a good example in this regard.
He humbly acknowledged that Jesus' ministry would keep on increasing as his own work would keep on decreasing.
How did John feel about that?
Seeing the advancement of Jesus moved John to say at John 3 verse 29,
my joy has been made complete.
Like John, humility allows a brother to be an overseer at one time and one being overseen at another time.
If you have the privilege to serve as a congregation elder, can you see how this spirit would benefit your entire elder body?
A fifth benefit is that humility helps us to endure opposition.
A humble person doesn't feel he's above being reproached.
He's able to endure unpleasant situations and not retaliate if Jehovah permits him to suffer adversity.
We have the example of Jesus as highlighted at 1 Peter 2 verse 23.
There it says, when he was being insulted, he did not insult in return.
When he was suffering, he did not threaten, but he entrusted himself to the one who judges righteously.
What helped Jesus to endure? Humility. He didn't think, do you know who I am? I shouldn't have to suffer like this.
Likewise, our maintaining a humble demeanor may well serve as a protection for us.
Perhaps even moving observers to come to our aid when others oppose us.
We've just talked about five benefits of humility and there are many others.
But what if we find that our background or our culture makes cultivating humility especially challenging for us?
This is how you feel. You may be encouraged by the example of a Roman army officer introduced to us in Matthew 8.
A Roman centurion had direct command of about 100 soldiers.
He likely had a past littered with many acts of violence and bloodshed.
Humility was likely not a quality associated with many officers of this rank.
Let's read the account in Matthew 8.5 through 8.
When he Jesus entered Capernaum, an army officer came to him pleading with him and saying,
Sir, my servant is laid up in the house with paralysis and he's suffering terribly.
He said to him, when I get there, I will cure him.
The army officer replied, Sir, I'm not worthy to have you come under my roof but just say the word and my servant will be healed.
The officers addressing Jesus twice as Sir was significant since Romans generally despised Jews.
This army officer also said in verse 8, I am not worthy. In other words, I'm not important enough for you to come under my roof.
Though I named in the scriptures, he proved himself to be an outstanding example of humility.
Note what Jesus said about this officer at Matthew 8 verse 10.
When Jesus heard that, he was amazed and said to those following him, I tell you the truth, with no one in Israel have I found so great a faith.
How does this account encourage us? Despite our past, like the army officer, all of us can develop humility.
How can we do so? Cultivated desire to be humbled to your very core.
Frequently remind yourself that to please God, you must be humble.
Also remember that pride and arrogance are traits of Satan.
Keep the correct perspective by meditating on your insignificance compared to Jehovah.
And pray to Jehovah for help to display humility as he does.